Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. And I want to thank everybody for listening. We have 100,000 listens, which I never thought we would get to. I didn't think we would get to 10,000 or even 1,000 listens. I know. It kind of blows me away. Thanks, everyone. Yeah. Thank you, everybody, for listening and subscribing and telling your friends and posting episodes to explain things to people on forums and stuff. And thank you all for telling me that your training is going better and you're getting more fit by you.
I'll see you soon.
I want to thank everybody for donating. And if you want to donate a little more, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And we have no show notes because this is an AMA episode. We've got merch at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com. Thank you, everybody, for buying the merch. And also for coaching and consultation, inquiries, questions, and comments, you can email empiricalcycling at gmail.com and Instagram AMAs in the stories at empiricalcycling.
Here we go. We asked on Reddit for people to post their questions for an AMA episode. And the first question is, how do I know if my anaerobic capacity power is a limiter or my FTP? Like if I get dropped during a selective part of the race on my limit, how do I decide whether it's anaerobic or aerobic components or something else? So this is a...
Very common question. In the short term, the article I wrote and the episode, you're training too hard for criteriums, that was because usually when I see people training hard for when they get dropped, they think that they need more anaerobic power, but really it's more aerobic power. Like for instance, if you had a 400 watt FTP,
I bet you would not have gotten dropped at that moment because it would have been well within your aerobic capacity to do so. Yeah, I think that's a common thing people think like, oh man, I got dropped up this hard, like two minute hill. I got to do a lot of like two minute efforts or something. And it's like, well, no, if you're just fresher going into that two minute hill, which like your FTP is higher, like you said, then like you can use, even if your anaerobic capacity isn't great, then you don't tap into it nearly as deeply.
if you think about anaerobic capacity being more of like hopefully reserve and you're not always going into your anaerobic capacity throughout the entire race because if you are you're maybe gonna have a bad really bad day yeah although there is one other dimension to this this is actually going to be the next Wattstock episode is going to touch on this it's not going to be a deep episode on it but we're gonna
get into this for part of it, which is that some people actually just don't have the ability to do repeated efforts. And this is very common when people do steady state training constantly. Erg mode. Erg mode. Yeah. And well, the thing is like.
You can do accelerations, you can do over-unders, you can do 10 minutes or 20 minutes of 15-15s or 40-20s or whatever you want to do, that kind of stuff. But it's one of those things where if you don't train those larger motor units when you sprint hard and have to repeat that kind of effort, like mountain biking, cross, criteriums, stuff like that.
It's one of those things where if you're always doing steady state stuff, you may not be good at that. You may be good at that. Some people are. I mean, some people are just gifted in that way and some people are not. I remember I was gifted in that way. Like after maybe two or three criteriums, I was in shape for the rest of the year. Like I could just do that. But, you know, now with some of the people I train, it's a thing that we are always working on is just getting them used to those kinds of things.
I think when you this is also maybe something that if you are stuck inside more like just getting used to doing intervals outside might help you with naturally because you are forced to adapt to the terrain slightly, you know, and not just hammer out this like even even if you're not using erg mode, even though it's fun to bag on erg mode. Just getting used to having to adjust your effort sort of naturally as the terrain presents itself.
might even help you with not feeling like you just can only sit in this one gear. Yeah, and actually, the next question, I'm going to tie into this one, which is, do long Zone 3 rides have a place in overall endurance athlete development? And, you know, I used to assign a lot of Zone 3 or what you might call tempo rides, but I really don't anymore as a focused training thing.
because especially for the people I've been training for a while, the fatigue that you need to, or the fatigue that you gather from doing a zone three ride long enough to have an impact, it's not worth it. You might as well ride endurance pace and then ride harder, you know, the next day or on top of that.
It's to me, it's not worth doing a steady zone three ride. Like I usually assign a steady zone three ride on like a rest week for like an hour or less, like something really easy, just enough to kind of, you know, keep your legs a little awake, you know, that kind of thing. But otherwise, like for dedicated training, I rarely, rarely prescribe it.
Andy Coggin originally made the training zones, he meant for them to be descriptive and not prescriptive. So like you would look at it more after a ride than like mid interval basically. Right, yeah. And because one of the things that happens to a lot of really, really well-trained endurance athletes is sometimes they're
What you might call Zone 2 ride actually strays into what one might call Zone 3 in terms of a percentage of FTP. Because somebody's LT1 is just that high, they can just ride there all day. And I'm nobody to tell them, you should ride a little easier if they can do the rides and they're not generating the amount of fatigue and that's really that right pace for them. I'm not going to say anything about it. That's great.
but oh sorry go ahead oh I just feel like I and I think I think maybe something else that comes with this is I think sometimes people think that like that kind of like zone three like tempo ride it's like it's like kind of fun right like you're just like going a little hard like the whole time like you feel like you're going kind you know you're not going slowly but you're not like hammer festing it so you feel like you're oh like you're going pretty fast like you're getting a good workout in like I feel like that's it's maybe a little deceiving like
the mental physical connection between like doing work in zone three and it actually being a useful longterm then. Yeah. Well, cause one of the things it's like to me, like a steady state zone three ride is like one of those tweener things. Cause this is what it's one of those things where I harp on where like, if you were only doing like 40 minutes.
of sweet spot at 90% of your FTP and you can do that for like 80 minutes. You're not adapting when you're doing those 40 minutes. You need to go out to like 80, 90 minutes to really get any kind of benefit. And if you can hold 80, 85% of your FTP for that long, then how long do you need to do that for? And if you're a pro, you can do...
hours and hours and hours. Every spring classic. Yeah. Six by 90 minute zone three is a workout that I saw a pro do. And by the way, that was one of the issues that that pro was having in not successfully developing further. So what I do like for tempo is stochastic tempo rides. I love these rides.
where you kind of ride like it's a breakaway or like you're in a race where people naturally will go harder on the hills and easier on the descents and kind of cruise on the flats. And that's a ride that I love, especially for people who need to work on the thing that we were just talking about of repeated accelerations. Like I'll tell this story where a long time ago,
I won't say when, but I was just starting to think about racing cyclocross and I had dabbled a little bit and I was in a bad crash and I was like, all right, I'm done with road for this year. I'm going to just ride my bike off road. So I would do loops in the state park near my house and there was about a 20 some odd minute loop and after getting kind of used to the road, or not the road,
The Trail, I started blasting through this thing, and I would do it for like 20-ish minutes, 25, and I would be dead by the end of it. And then after like two or three weeks of this, I was like, oh my god, I am so much faster. My Strava times were like just dropping, and I went to a race, and I had a phenomenal race. I was like...
I didn't do any real specific cross training. I didn't go to cross practice really. I didn't do this. I didn't do that. I did the occasional FTP intervals and this, and I was on fire. And I went, oh, there's really something to this, isn't there? And it's one of my very favorite types of workouts, especially when people are kind of needing to get into race shape or it's even like a good kind of FTP type.
Ride, if you do it for like 60 minutes, it's not like strictly FTP work, but it's a really good aerobic workout to do this kind of stochastic effort for like an hour, hour and a half, or even longer. So that's the kind of tempo workout that I really like. Yeah, that's a good point. I think it's kind of, I mean, like you said, that's kind of fun anyway. It's way better than just being like, gotta stay at...
75% just got to stay this. Yeah. Although I got to warn everybody for doing that. Bring extra tubes because when you're really thrashing a cross bike on single track, you go through a lot of tubes and tires.
After I went tubeless, my poor rim, it just wouldn't die. I dented it and bent it back out like 20 times, the front rim. It's more sealant than it is aluminum anymore. Yeah, it is the actual physical manifestation of yeet and prey. Alright, third question.
A while back, Andy Coggin posted on a forum that the average cyclist can reach a watts per kilogram of 3.9. I would assume that means that FTP. So what are your thoughts on this as a coach? What has been your experience with athletes? In my experience, I have...
Since we've done no show prep for this, and I'm not going to go dig through all of my athletes' data that I have now, for the men, I would say yes, that probably average is about four watts per kilogram at FTP. Yeah, I think last season I raced road, I was like three and a half, and I'm like, not exactly alike.
World-Class Gifted Aerobic Athlete So, yeah, I mean, I think I think back to, like, the backlog of all those, like, Cat 3s in New England road scene Like, so many of them Like, you would look at Strava Files later and be like, oh yeah, like, there's a reason I'm getting dropped Yeah, but I think anthropometrically
It also kind of makes sense because the average quote unquote trained VO2 max acceptable for studies for deciding whether or not athletes are trained is about a VO2 max of 60. And that's where a lot of people typically will, a lot of men will typically peak out is around like 57 to like 63, 65 on average.
Some people are below that and some people are above that and that's okay. You can still be a really good competitive cyclist with a low wads per kilo. Would you say that, and you can cut this too if this is too much speculation, but would you say that women probably come in right around 10% under on both of those? I feel like typically if you look at the famed Coggin chart, most of the women's numbers are in that 10-ish percent lower.
Yeah, I actually don't look at that chart hardly ever. I think the last time I looked at it was like five or six years ago. But in my experience, I would say the equivalent woman is about like one watt per kilo at FTP lower than most men for like the equivalent race category. But this is just in my experience. Yeah, that's a little bit more than 10%, but that's in that.
kind of rough ballpark. Actually, yeah, there is another question related to this later on, I think. So we'll get back to this. We'll circle back around. Oh, what is your most controversial training opinion? Kyle, you want to take a stab at what's my most controversial training opinion? Oh, God, I don't even know. Keto is for idiots.
Sorry. I've never said that in public. I still haven't. That all of the emphasis on posterior chain stuff is kind of bro science? A little bit. I mean, posterior chain is like...
Traps, lats, erectors. Hamstrings. Yeah, glutes and hamstrings. And on a bike, our hamstrings are basically not that active because our knees are flexed, which means they're put in a position where they are far from optimal power generation. I mean, because we're evolved to run. And so cycling versus running, like leg extension, is very different.
So, yeah, I mean, like knee extension is the really big one. That's the anterior chain. And, yeah, I mean, I don't think that's that hot of a take, though, because, I mean, a lot of people are of that opinion. And I've, you know, I've fallen into the posterior chain trap before. I've definitely said as much on a webinar or two. No, I think it's just one. But actually, I think my most controversial training opinion might be that the machine learning
An auto-coach, it's never really going to be that good, and that big data cannot give you actual physiologic insight. I feel like there was that meme where someone was like, oh, machine learning is just statistics, and then it's stuff thrown at them. But it kind of is, and in that sense, you're right in the sense that even if you have huge sample populations,
You're going to still, through something that's called basically the central limit theorem, the end result is going to be something Gaussian shaped. Yeah. And so you're going to naturally trend toward this Gaussian thing. Even if you have the world's most exhaustive data set, it just tends to all combine and be Gaussian-like. It just becomes a more perfect Gaussian distribution. Right. Yeah, exactly.
The same things apply before where, yeah, like if for a Gaussian, a certain number of people aren't going to fit into the, you know, standard 20 minute FTP test like is acceptable and you'll fall into the same pitfalls there where if you happen to be lucky slash unlucky and you're a sigma or two or a standard deviation or two away from the mean, then the thing that that machine learning comes up with isn't going to be great for you. No, it's not. I mean, that's where the
the OBLA standard came from a long time ago. They were looking at what is the actual approximate blood lactate concentration at maximal lactate steady state or LT2 or whatever you want to call it. And they found about an app population average of about 4.0 millimoles. And so a lot of people use four millimoles as a standard. And what actually happens is there's a range. It's like two to eight or nine millimoles concentration.
at MLSS. I mean, it's a range. And that's one of the pitfalls that we get into. And that's going to change based on the person and their training status and everything else. I mean, but I get why, I think I get why it's happening. And this is pure speculation, but bear with me for a second. I think it's because people
kind of want to like set it and forget it. You know, like everything that we're doing now is becoming more convenient and less engaging. Like, you know, because people want to get in a car and you just tell it like, I want to be over here. I don't want to, I want to have this hour to myself. I don't want to have it, you know, driving and sitting in traffic. Take me to cat one, please. Exactly. And so you kind of want to just go, okay, well, this thing's got my back, you know, and
It's cheaper than hiring somebody like me by a long shot. And that's fine. I'm not saying it's bad that people do that. But the idea that it's going to lead to your optimal fitness gains, I don't think that's ever going to happen. I mean, because no matter what, you would pretty much have to give it a blood sample and a muscle biopsy.
like several times a day for it to really track all the things and we still don't even know what things that we need to track like we don't know what biomarkers there are for overtraining we don't know what soreness is caused by you know there's a thousand things where like even if you give it your best like RPE for everything and it tries to adjust like it still doesn't know that like you fought with your spouse and it still doesn't know that you got fired from your job and it still doesn't know that you didn't sleep at all last night I mean
or I mean, well, maybe your whoop strap will try to tell you that. But like all these things and it doesn't know how you're going to react in the long term. You know, it doesn't know about your gut microbiota. It doesn't know so many things that can have small effects or even large effects and maybe compounding or not. And I just I don't buy it. I mean, I mean, that's why like I used to I was a carpenter for 20 years. And by the end of.
being a carpenter, I was just, I was done with it because I have done, I had done every single thing the same way. Like, like it's, it never changed. It's just like, yeah. And I love coaching because it is never the same, you know, like, yeah, this is why I drive a manual transmission car where like, you know, like I know, like if I stomp the gas too much, like I'm going to go in that ditch or like, I'm going to lose the rear end.
It's more engaging. Yeah, I have a really engaging car. I mean, I wish it was like a seven-speed dogleg, but that's okay. I can't afford an Aston Martin. But if more people hire your services. Yes, indeed. In 20 years, I will be able to afford. Yeah, but like I like being engaged and I like, you know, having that, you know, I like having
and having my focus on that thing in front of me and having that interaction. Personally, I don't like the set it and forget it thing. I'll tell you the worst thing that I've done during the hard, hard lockdown earlier this spring was I was moving the silverware around in the silverware drawer.
just because I was so used to everything being in the same spot. I was just like shifted around. And just so that like when I go for a spoon, I'm just like, oh, hey, you're over here now. Just to like, you know, break myself out of my routine, like, and just have that moment. And then I get yelled at for doing that. And so I don't do that anymore. But it was really fun while I did.
You should just start misbalancing the egg carton so that the eggs are in random places every time when you pick it up and you don't know how heavy it's going to be. That's a good one. Or get like a machinist to make you like a lead egg that you can just put in random spots. Sorry. Kyle, can I come stay with you? Anyway, so we've gotten off topic, but...
Yeah, I don't think auto-coach and I don't think machine learning is really going to solve anything. I think that having that human there and that human interaction is always going to be necessary. I will say though, I think that having that auto-coach or that machine learning thing would probably be
a very good replacement for just like the cookie cutter plans that people will pay 10 bucks or whatever and just that just they download and they try to follow. Like if you could spring a little bit more for that like, you know, semi intelligently generated one, it's probably going to be way better than just following this, you know, spreadsheet PDF thing. Yeah, but at the same time, though, like there are so many people who come to me like, hey, I stalled out on program X.
Can you help me? Can I get faster? And I don't want to say what Program X is, but they know who they are, and there are many out there, and can you help me get faster? And usually, yeah, we do. But I think that's where those platforms really need to go for the middle of that bell curve.
and, you know, really does take a human eye. And I think I don't think machine learning is ever going to get it to, you know, kind of put all the pieces together. Like, like, what was that? What was that thing with like, you know, the machine learning thing is like a hammer and a nail. And six months later, you think it's going to be simple, easy, like make hammer hit nail. And then like six months later, they're both replaced with question marks. Like, how do we define hammer? How do we define nail?
Because humans are actually really amazing at what we've evolved to do. And it turns out it's really hard to get a machine to do it. Although I'm sure there's going to be lots of people in AI who are going to tell me I'm wrong. I mean, look at the human slash robot verification quizzes that they have where it's like, click all the things, have a stoplight in them. Computers can't do that.
No, that's true. That's why they're used. And yet humans can just be like, yep, that's a light, that's a light, that's a light, done. Like four seconds. Well, here's the thing is like one of the big differences that I've picked up from reading about this kind of thing. So I'm not an expert by any means, but it's that we recognize the function of a thing rather than its shape. Yes, exactly. And so we can see like a writing implement, like here's a pen.
You show this to a machine, it looks different than the Sharpie that I've got over here and the mechanical pencil I've got over here and the marker. And it's shaped an awful lot like a sandwich, like a sub sandwich or something. So maybe it's a very thin cigar. Well, it's a little small, so it could be a straw. I don't know. But if I take this mechanical pencil and I take everything out of both sides, I do have a straw.
Okay, so next question. Sorry, that was a long one, everybody. Next question. Does AMPK block mTOR if we are using different muscles? As in, can I go running after a bicep session? The answer is, if you are using different muscles, they are not related. I mean, centrally, like your nervous system might, you know, get a little more fatigue for like that. You might actually have neural fatigue, you know, during your run if you're trying to do like sprints or something like that.
But no, the mTOR that is expressed in your muscles is not going to be interacting with the AMPK in your legs When I saw the question, I was trying to think of a sport or something that would require two completely different training styles for your upper versus lower body, and I couldn't think of one, but I'm sure
If you thought hard enough, there would be something where, oh, this one sport requires more, I don't know, endurance in the arms and more explosiveness in the legs or vice versa or something like that. Yeah, I mean, we could make a sport like that. We could have like a marathon shot put combination. It's a marathon, but your gate start is by your max bench press.
I asked everybody to only submit one question, please. This person submitted another one that I thought was pretty good. So we're going to tackle this one. How much volume does one need to maintain FTP minimally? I will be training for a marathon next year and would like to retain FTP gains from now. I would say in terms of like volume volume, like hours on the bike.
You know, it's actually really hard to say because there are so many factors that go into an FTP. VO2 max, that's not going to change that much for you because if you are doing a lot of aerobic stuff, you know, that's going to maintain your heart stroke volume and it's going to maintain your plasma volume and stuff like that. However, because of the different recruitment strategies and, you know, less use of knee extenders and yada, yada, yada.
You probably will see a slight shift of your FTP as you do less on the bike. My suggestion would be to do as much on the bike as you can without screwing up your marathon training. Because whatever you can do, it's going to be better than just not riding at all, but it's obviously also not going to be like, you know, you're not going to be able to maintain 100% of your FTP, I don't think.
It's been a while since I've trained a multi-sport athlete, and I forget most of what I knew back then. Yeah, I was going to say, the other thing is, depending on how fast you're going to be running this marathon, it's not like you're training for an ultra, where all of your training is going to be nowhere near that intensity level either.
you know it's a three to four hour ballpark let's say marathon is not so different in duration from a hilly road race or something like that right yeah I mean and also I'm sure a lot of people are wanting us to answer the other question like what about just regularly like what if we're not running a marathon yeah so all right so let's answer that one so how much volume does one need to maintain FTP just on the bike if that's all you're doing
I would say whatever your training volume is and your, you know, whatever training intensity you have, I would say you could probably maintain it for about six weeks before it starts to fall off a couple of watts. If you are still maintaining activity, but you're not doing specific FTP training, maybe like a session a week here or there, something like that. Depends on the person too, because if you're young.
Chances are, and I've seen this happen, people have gone to do research for two weeks, no bikes in sight, no anybody in sight really, and they come back to nationals and they've lost nothing. It's like they never left. And we talked about this in another episode, I forget exactly what...
which one maybe was another questions episode but it's basically like one of the things that you lose immediately or more quickly is like blood volume which is actually fairly quickly replaced once you resume activity you know that like you may have it drop off but there are also other tricks you can do to convince your body to
Generate more blood volume, legally, not like, you know, saving blood that you had earlier, because that's, you shouldn't do that. Yeah, 100%. I mean, people, you know, when it gets warm out, one of the things that we do is expand our plasma volume so we have a larger reserve to sweat from. Okay, so, yeah, but you can't, I mean, if you, yeah, it's really hard to, like, really maintain FTP. Like, you've still got to be training fairly well.
but not pushing yourself. When the training volume falls off and the intensity falls off a little bit, I would expect you can probably maintain your FTP within 5 or 10 watts for maybe about a month or two before it starts to fall off, but you really have to do some maintenance if you want to maintain it. Another all-too-common example is people...
Crash or whatever, they wreck in the middle of race season, I think taking two weeks off or something, even a month off, so they broke something or whatever, and they can take a month off and they can't before they can really like put out the power and they're worried that they're going to lose fitness and people, you know, this happens to people all the time and they chug along just fine, even though they initially freak out like, oh my God, I broke my wrist, so I'm going to like lose all of my fitness. I mean, all the athletes that I've coached who have broken something and taken some time off,
Almost universally, they come back stronger. And that's just a function of getting that break and getting that rest. Break. And then easing back into it. If you start immediately trying to do FTP intervals at your FTP, it's not going to be there because you've lost that plasma volume. It's just not. You're going to have a bad day. Yes. Don't try it.
Start easy and build up the intensity gradually and then when you're ready to, then you can start training hard again and you're going to find that, oh my god, I'm stronger than I was. Yeah, pretty much universally. And usually that's the function of a mid-season break when people take some time off, do some easy riding, do some weightlifting, do some cross-training for a couple months and then...
you know, and the, you know, midwinter, early spring, somebody starts training really hard again, you know, then that's when they push past their previous bests. Okay. Uh, special training considerations for an endurance cyclist doted with a high proportion of type two parentheses, fast twitch on close parentheses. Thank you for the clarification, by the way, muscle fibers. Um, I mean,
Here's the thing about fast twitch fibers is generally people think that there's a metabolic component that goes hand in hand with fiber type. But fiber type and myosin heavy chain classification type does not correlate 100% with a metabolic
obligate pathway. It's not like you have this type 2 fiber, therefore it has to be using a thousand times more carbohydrates than a slow switch fiber. It just doesn't happen like that. A lot of good sprinters out there just genetically cannot develop into having that much type 1 fibers. So half or 40, 50% of their muscle fiber is fast twitch.
And it's actually really well aerobically conditioned fast twitch fibers. So I would say it's less to do with your fiber type. And especially if you're thinking about in relation to your sprint, your sprint also does not necessarily have any relationship to your FTP. You know, because how many amateurs do you know with like a 15, 1800 watt sprint who are never going to be cat ones? Me.
and I don't I don't have any special considerations here. I would say I mean you kind of beat around something there a little bit but like just maybe watching fatigue like if you if you know that you have like a pretty good sprint you may be more enticed to do like more sprint workouts but that may actually cause you to dig a bigger hole than you realize because you're like oh this is great like I love sprinting on my bike but like you can dig a big hole and be in like a
world of hurt trying to recover from too many of those. Yeah. Actually, that's a really good point. So that is actually one of the differences. For instance, I've probably told this story on the podcast before, but I went out on a sprint workout with another fellow sprinter. We were both around 1300 watts or so and a climby friend who was about 900 watts sprint.
And, you know, we're doing like 10-15 second sprints and me and the other sprinter are like dry heaving on the side of the road after every effort. And we're like, hey, climbing guy, like, can you please sprint harder? Like, what is going on here? And it's like, and it's not the fact that he's not sprinting hard. He's really going as hard as he can. He just cannot generate the immediate ATP demand that we could to...
You know, put ourselves in the hole like that. And so it's actually not a function of, you know, the fiber type in this case, as it is so much the function of, you know, creating that much of a disturbance cellularly, because it's not just in type two fibers, like when you sprint, when you recruit.
motor units maximally. You are recruiting everything all the way down to your very, very basic like get out of bed and stretch motor units. And so all of those are going to be in a similar kind of hurt. And it's not just the fiber type itself. So I would say watch the hard efforts. Don't dig yourself into a hole unless you know you have time to recover and get out of it. That would be my...
Best piece of advice. And the other piece of advice is if you are going to be doing these hard efforts, you are going to need more carbohydrates than your power meter says you burned kilojoules. It's not a one-to-one relationship with this kind of work. I'll have a big handful of Sour Patch Kids right before a hard ride. Sprinter food. Cake. Why? So you have a rainbow vomit in the middle of your ride?
Yeah, we'll actually get into, I do want to do an episode on that of why, you know, how many carbohydrates does it really burn when we do hard efforts? Because like I said, it's not a one-to-one thing. And it's not even like approximately like, you know, 25, it's not the efficiency thing. It's not like the 20% to 25% approximately efficiency. It's not that. It's actually...
Simpler than that. So we'll get into that. Okay, next question. You've mentioned that you don't think time spent doing zone two on a trainer is any more efficient than riding outside. Following that logic, does this mean that the training benefits of zone two come from keeping your body in a state of exertion that tends to continue at a stoplight? Or is the normal stopping time one would experience just too insignificant to actually matter?
I know TR says that to achieve equivalent training stimulus between indoors and outdoors, you need to spend 50% more time outside. That seems far-fetched, but I would imagine there's something to be gained by never stopping. You, sir, or ma'am, are very insightful. I feel like I have heard, when I was starting off cycling, I heard this like 50% thing, like...
and this wasn't even applying to like zone two on the trainer I heard this people trying to apply this to any work on the trainer so like the winter they're like oh yeah like the trainer sucks but you know it's like you're doing like 50% more than you would be if you went outside and like they try to tell you it's because you're coasting or going downhill or whatever and you're like you spend 50% of the time you ride outside coasting or going downhill like really? Yeah well I mean that's what it comes down to is like you know a lot of the time when I think about
The adaptation that one gets, you know, one of the big adaptations, one of the big things of adaptation is time. Time is one of the largest contributors of rollback adaptation. And, you know, that's why I said in the, you know, how do you pace endurance rides? That's why I said ride to RPE. It matters more that you do more time than it does.
You do 10 more watts. Right. Nailing wattage is not necessarily the goal. Yeah, I know. And it's going to change a little bit as you go through the day, what your optimal thing is based on your fatigue and blah, blah, blah. So I would say as long as the pedaling time is equivalent, they're approximately equivalent one-to-one. If you are spending 50% more...
50% of your ride outside coasting, I would say you're doing it wrong. Even if you live in like a hilly area, actually Tim Cusick just covered this on a webinar recently. And it was nice to hear him say this because this is something I've been harping on for a little while privately. And then I was like, oh, Tim thinks that, okay, I can say this publicly now because somebody smart agrees with me. Which is that, you know,
He was talking about how when you're outside doing endurance rides, one of the big things is to try to keep that coasting and that time down to a minimum. And the reason that this is, I forget if he got into it, but I don't think he did. But the reason is because time is a stimulus. And coasting, you're not contracting your muscles. Things like presence of calcium, that sustained challenge to NADH and ATP.
like the hormonal response of pedaling constantly. All of these kinds of things contribute a reactive oxygen species, flux, like oxygen flux through your cell. There's 900 things, actually probably nine, but there's a lot of stuff where as you pedal more, you're going to get more stimulus. And if you're not pedaling, you're not getting that stimulus. So that's why it's important to...
Think about that in terms of indoor-outdoor equivalents As long as it's not like the extreme which would be like you could imagine a situation where the pedaling times would be equivalent and yet they would not be the same if you were going outside and you were pedaling hard for 30 seconds and then stopping and then pedaling hard for 30 seconds and then stopping for 30 seconds. That would be like
The ridiculous thing that I hope no one is doing for their road rides. Yeah. I mean, for a five-hour ride, if you do have to stop at some lights, I mean, it's fine. You get off and pee when you're doing a five-hour trainer ride occasionally. It's fine. I mean, you stop. You have to coast sometimes. But when I'm training somebody who's very well trained, with pros, I really harp on this a lot, is keep pedaling.
because if you've only got three hours to train this day because the pro peloton doesn't pay women that much, for instance, and so you have a full-time job and you can only train three hours this day, you need to make every minute of that count as much as possible and pedaling for that ride as much as possible is a good way to maximize your time investment.
And especially if it's one of those things where like, you know, five-hour ride, okay, but, you know, I want to give this person a little more stimulus, you know, then I'm harping on like, you know, don't go for your usual mountains or anything like that. Like, find a flatter route. People in Colorado, this is a big issue. I'm like, no, like, stop climbing these mountains. Like, you need to pedal. Like, pedal more.
And sometimes if it's like a seven-hour ride, if they get five hours of pedaling time and that's what I would have given them, like, okay, cool. We'll do a seven-hour ride. You do five hours of pedaling time and that's all right. That's what I want to see. Okay, next question is, it appears that the consensus on this sub, that's Reddit Velo, is that it's worth getting a coach once your fitness plateaus or nearly plateaus after following one of the many available sensible training plans. In your experience, is it worth...
working with a coach way before that. So my answer is, I think it is. All of my athletes who I've started coaching from very, very early on have progressed faster and further in the same amount of time where a lot of people, you know,
Obviously, we don't have an exact apples to apples comparison. Like, they didn't also go do, like, a stock plan from somewhere. They don't have a twin where they can have them set out on. Yeah, but I mean, like, usually, like, I'm thinking of a couple collegiate athletes I started with. And, you know, some of them are, you know, getting pro contracts today. Like, it's, you know, that's...
You know, it's crazy to think about how far I've come with them. And yeah, so training somebody early on in their training, the improvements, like I think in just maybe like a year, usually I think the average FTP improvement I've seen is like 80 to 100 watts or something like that from like off the couch. So it's not like, or almost off the couch. So it's not like, you know, somebody's been training and then we get them another 100 watts. It's like somebody's like,
riding for fun and does the occasional race, rides kind of hard sometimes and has maybe tried the occasional interval session. Like from there, yeah, we've taken them pretty far pretty quickly. Then it obviously tapers off a little bit. But yeah, so I think if possible, if you can afford it, I would say, yeah, get the coach. Yeah, I think like you said, it's just a matter of being efficient with your time. Like an analogy would be like,
trying to learn a musical instrument right like you can buy a guitar drum set or something like that and watch videos online and practice in your home and all the stuff but like you'll get way better way faster if you get lessons for example yeah and there are people who I don't you know don't get me wrong there are people who are self-trained self-taught like professional musicians prodigies whatever you want to call them but typically people who have played an instrument probably have
I've felt like, you know, you know what we're talking about where like you tend to do better if you get some professional instruction because, you know, for example, like in for a lot of like instruments, like if you don't have a teacher, you may develop habits early on that turned out not to be the most effective habits when you actually have to play something extremely technical, but you can get away with it when you're just, you know, I don't know, playing.
Wonderwall in your house. This sounds exactly like a conversation I had with a guitar teacher when I was like 18. I was like, yeah, I know. Everyone likes Freebird, but I was like, I was like cribbing Zach Wild lines. And he was like, you can kind of play like that, but you're going to have to use your pinky finger at some point. And I'm like, man.
And eventually I did, you know, to my benefit. Anyway, what's the best way to try and keep some endurance when doing majority weight training in the off-season? Or let me rephrase, how little time can I get away with spending on the bike if currently my goal is to build maximum sprint power for on-season work? Thinking about spending next year around the velodrome more than outside, or should I still be training FTP?
Kyle, I want to take a crack at this. 20 rep squats. I mean, I can't quite tell if the person mean by wanting to spend time in the velodrome if they mean they want to do like track sprinting events or track endurance events. I'm going to assume endurance events since they're still thinking about FTP. If you're a track sprinter thinking about FTP, you should probably stop thinking about FTP.
Go ahead. Sorry, I just heard whatever you've heard. Yeah, so I would say it depends on what you want to prioritize. Because there's a lot that goes on when we build maximal strength and muscle. And one of the things that happens when we build muscle is we have a lot more area.
to service with our existing capillaries. And so what I would suggest is I would do as much endurance riding as you can while still being able to do the lifting that you want to do. So if you're lifting like twice a week during the week and you can still ride like 12 hours, you know, six hours Saturday, six hours Sunday, I would do that if possible. I would say also like, I don't know.
It looks like this poster is in the UK, so wintertime commuting may not be the most exciting, but for example, if you were able to commute in the wintertime, that may be one way to get in some hours on the bike that doesn't maybe feel like training, but you'll at least be spending some time on the bike and getting some endurance stimulus.
alongside your weight training. I'm going to say commute to work and not to the gym. I've done the bike commute to the gym and it sucks. Oh my God, it's so bad. Especially the ride home is the worst because you have to accelerate from a stop and it's just, oh, there is nothing left in those legs.
It's so horrible. So don't do that. And also, because riding endurance right after lifting, that's when you get that PCG1 Alpha or PGC1 Alpha slash mTOR interference after a couple weeks, and you're going to see your sick gains bra go away in the gym. Yeah. Yeah. So I think, like you said, yeah, general rule of thumb, if whatever is your focus, you can do as much as you want.
Outside of that, up until the point it starts ruining what you wanted to actually do. So in this case, if the off-season, if you want to primarily focus on lifting, you can do as much endurance riding until like...
totally bones you for your next lifting session or vice versa. We talked about this before. If you want to keep lifting a little bit during race season, that's fine right until it ruins you going out to try to do openers or something. You're like, oh my god, I should have done those squats yesterday or whatever because then you show up to a crit and you just get dropped. Or you can have the same approach as the other poster and just ride on an upper body day.
So you can head over there, you can do some bench press, you can do some incline press, you can do some dumbbell flies, you can get a sick pump going, and then you can ride home and still be fine Or maybe you can merge the two and you can do military press while on a spin bike, don't do that Just go to SoulCycle with some dumbbells, my god
But they use like two pound dumbbells. You got to use some, you know. All right. Yeah. Go to SoulCycle with some 35s. You'll be all right. Okay. Next question. Oh, okay. Would you rather fight a horse-sized duck or a hundred duck-sized horses? This is Reddit after all. Thank you, Reddit. I said we try to keep it to bikes, but we'll answer anything. So, Kyle, what is your preference? I've always said...
the single horse sized duck I feel like a hundred of anything like you think like a hundred is a lot of anything even if they're so small they're so small I feel like you you could get swarmed they have they have you know they can bite they can kick you like the big duck I think they're gonna like break your ankles and you're gonna fall into like a field of angry tiny horses
and they can jump on you. I don't know. I've always thought about just fighting. Kyle plays hockey. Grab your hockey stick and you have a solution immediately. I'm just thinking fighting one thing is easier than 100. That's where I've always gotten at that. I don't know. Well, ducks are assholes. Like ducks, male ducks especially. Like I would rather fight a horse-sized female duck. But if it's a horse-sized male duck, I'm going to go with the 100 duck-sized horses. Okay.
I don't want to fight a large male duck 50-50 split here two answers okay next question what sensors would you like to see become as popular as current heart rate and power meters
Like, for instance, skin temperature, core temperature. Well, the way that you measure core temperature while you're riding your bike is with a rectal thermometer. So if you're not comfortable with that, I suggest you forget about temperature. Body-mounted accelerometers, well, there's already those with, I think, the Leomo stuff. EKG, heart rate.
High Data Rate Power Meters, which record torque and angular velocity. Well, high data rate power meters, I would personally love to see that, only for sprinting, but for the average athlete, it's really not that big a deal. Yeah, the, what is it, the InfoCrank data logger, it's basically, I think a, I think it's 256 hertz.
Sampling, but instead of using a Garmin, because your Garmin will only do 1Hz, you basically have to use an entire separate Android phone that is your bike computer in order to log the data at such a high rate. So that sort of thing does actually exist. Kilohertz sampling, Jesus, I don't know if kilohertz sampling is necessary.
and 40 RPMs will make the math easy, right? 240 revolutions per minute. That's four pedal strokes a second. I still don't see why you need a thousand samples a second. You know, I think a hundred, even a hundred would probably be sufficient. Um, yeah. And that's assuming that you're pedaling at 240 RPM, which basically no one does anymore, except if you're doing rev outs. Yeah. And the thing is like, I would also,
you know we can see almost the same data you know I think would actually be the most informative in like starts on the track yeah but also then it takes a little while to wake up so you'd have to start recording like right yeah there's there's some logistics there okay so the sensor that I would really like to see become more popular is a gas exchange sensor so O2 and CO2 how would you
I'm just imagining you having to hold something in your mouth or over your face the whole time you're riding. Well, you'd have to do a mask. It would have to be calibrated, especially with the CO2. And yeah, you would have to carry some extra batteries. And I mean, we're all getting used to wearing masks now. So I figure it's just the next step.
Yeah, but they are prohibitively expensive, although the portable ones, like the VO2 Master and the Pinot and stuff like that, are much cheaper than the lab units, which are like $40,000 or something like that, like the Cosmeds They're a line item on a grant from the NIH or whatever Yeah, and they're more than a car for the rest of us
Yeah, that's the one I would love to see more people using. But again, you know, unless you want to spend like 10 grand on it. And even I've heard that a lot of them are not terribly reliable. And so I'm actually, I'm holding out on getting one myself for athlete testing. Next question. How would you recommend incorporating a couple days per week of running into an off-season plan?
It would be mainly to avoid trainer boredom and burnout and to get outside during this coming winter of discontents. Just go run. Yeah, I think we kind of hit on it earlier, but well, firstly, for running, if you haven't done it in a while, don't start too fast. Like if you've got a friend who runs all the time and you want to go run with them, don't have them take you on a hard run the first time or first few weeks out maybe because your hips, knees, ankles may hate you.
In May, I mean probably. I think we're going to assume this person has some running experience. But, yeah, kind of like we said earlier, like if it doesn't mess up your trainer workouts or whatever you're doing this winter, yeah, run if you're feeling good. You know, if you can't imagine watching another Netflix movie while doing, you know, indoor rides, yeah. Don't slip. Don't slip on the ice if you live somewhere icy.
Yeah, you can do it before a trainer ride or after a trainer ride. If you do it before, make sure that if you're doing a trainer ride with intervals or something like that, you're not too tired for it. Or just do it on the weekend or do it for fun, like take a jog in the morning and then do a bike ride in the afternoon. I mean, there's a thousand ways to do it. So just do it. Make sure it's not interrupting anything that you've got priorities on and don't get shin splints.
So next question is, what are we improving when we increase TTE but keep FTP the same? Generally, what we are improving is fat oxidation at FTP. It's pretty simple. Because generally, when we exhaust, for a lot of the power curve, not all of it, obviously, but in terms of time duration, a lot of the fatigue that we get to.
is glycogen depletion. And as we get into larger and larger motor units that are a little less oxidatively trained in most cyclists, then we are obviously getting pretty empty. So when we actually look at muscle fibers individually, after an exhaustive effort, we can see significant glycogen depletion in most of the...
in one, if not two or three of the areas where glycogen is kept in the actual muscle fibers themselves. So when this happens, we usually get a little bit of contractile dysfunction, there's some inhibition and blah, blah, blah. And so when we extend TTE, one of the things that can happen is we are actually building and storing more glycogen.
But we cannot actually increase glycogen stores to the degree that we need to go from a 40-minute TTE to an 80-minute TTE. And that's something that, for instance, a lot of my athletes, when they get in a really, really good winter season on the bike of low-endurance training, low-intensity endurance training, a lot of the time in the spring, that first FTP test, they get to 65, 75,
80-85 minutes TTE, which is ridiculous. Like, three people it happened to last year. And, you know, and the question is, like, somebody asked me once, like, hey, how do you know that's their TTE? Like, that's actually their FTP? Because that's the inflection point. Because, you know, if we go a little higher, if we go to, like, 300, like, one guy with 330 watts, actually, or two guys, 330 watts at 80 minutes.
If we go a little higher, like 340, 350, we don't see that logarithmic drop-off time. We see an exponential drop-off time. Yeah. I would say another, just as a point of reference, one pound of fat is like 3,500 calories. So your body at any one time, if you can burn more fat, you immediately have access to like, you know, unless you're...
Mr. Olympia shredded like 0% body fat. Like you have a ton of extra fuel on you at all times if you can burn fat. You'll never run out. And actually people have asked me this a lot like, hey, I thought we burned 100% carbohydrates at FTP. And it's like, well, we actually don't. Because, you know, the mechanism of FTP doesn't actually...
will preclude us from burning fatty acids at FTP. Because of the way that FTP actually manifests physiologically, which we'll get into another day. I'm really sorry. Deep dive. I wish I could spoil it. Very deep dive. It doesn't mean that we cannot burn fatty acids. If we can move more fatty acids, if we can mobilize them, we will burn them.
If we were inhibited from that kind of thing, keto stuff wouldn't work. Ketogenic athletes, I've seen RER data from them, and they're burning like half to two-thirds of their energy at FTP is coming from fat. That's a lot. Yeah, yeah, it is.
And that's what's happening when we've got long, long, long TTEs. So when that increases, a little bit is glycogen storage, but a lot of it is actually fat mobilization. And then, you know, frequently in long-term development, one of the things that happens with a lot of my athletes is TTE goes out to like 60, 65 minutes, and we do some VO2 max work, not because TTE is at like 60 minutes, but just because, you know.
We've seen the good progression. TTE could be like 75, 85 minutes. Or, you know, it could have gone to like 50 minutes, you know. And then we do some via to max work and then FTP goes up and the TTE shortens. Because at that intensity, the athlete cannot mobilize as much fatty acids. So the TTE shortens. And then, you know, then it's time to go do endurance training again and extend that FTP or the TTE. Yeah. Because, you know. So you kind of have two knobs to turn there. Yeah.
Yeah, you do. And we'll do a deep, deep, deep dive on that kind of thing. I think actually it'd be really cool to do an episode on long-term athlete development and periodization of that. I've actually done a lot of consoles lately where that has come up. So it seems like a thing that people would want to hear. That actually segues pretty well into the next question. Oh, I didn't read it yet.
Thoughts on when to train VO2 max over a year? The questioner says, I find my FTP responds really well after a block of VO2 work, so would it make sense to include maintenance work year-round or just include before races start? Although FTP expected to drop off after some time off, I find it only really jumps back up once I've done some VO2 work again. Would it be worth including some earlier in the winter to try and train at a higher FTP for longer before races?
I would say no. I mean, it depends, right? Yeah. Like everything depends. Everything is diapers. Yeah. There's no black and white in anything. Yeah. Yeah. So like if you're going to like, you know, finish up your fall and go right into, you know, hard training, Fiatimax stuff, I would not do that. I would give yourself a rest first. I mean, in the long term.
Now here's a preview of the long-term periodization thing is, you know, I think a lot in terms of VO2 max. Like how, like when can we train somebody's VO2 max? How much can we train somebody's VO2 max? Because that is the long-term limiter, which is not to say that we need to preclude FTP work. But like I was just saying, like the typical dynamic that I see of people developing in the long term, like, I mean, this year people have put on like, you know, 30, 40, 50, 60 watts of FTP.
because they're not racing and they can actually just focus on training. All training all the time. Which is phenomenal. And one of the things that I see with people who are really well trained, and this is going to be sacrilege to a lot of people, is FTP training does not necessarily increase FTP if you are really well trained. VO2Maxwork does.
Interesting. Maybe this is my most controversial training opinion. I would say the other thing, in terms of training VO2 max throughout the year, also potentially if you are someone who eventually gets burned out of hard intervals or whatever, don't torture yourself over the winter. Recovery is as much a part of the whole training process as the actual training is.
Actually, oh, we actually missed somebody's follow-up question on TTE. So for athletes who have good internal self-pacing, how do we get realistic insight into TTE? I'd love to know and thus be able to train mine, but it seems to be a pretty, quote-unquote, shallow roll-off in the sorts of durations we're talking about. Perhaps, but more simply, what if there isn't a flat part of an individual's power curve? Mine has a gradual downward slope. Everybody's does.
Yeah, I was going to say a flat one would be awesome. My 60 minute power is the same as my 300 minute power. Great. Okay, well, so actually here's my favorite part of this question. Do we pick a power duration combo from the power curve and try to train that? You know, in practical terms, that's typically what I do. In terms of intervals, like if it's straight up like steady power FTP intervals, somebody can do like
somebody can do like 40 minutes, you know, we'll start with like four by 10 minutes, then, you know, then we'll do four by 12 minutes, then we'll do three by 15. And then we'll try to like build time that way. But I have a, you know, a separate running tab for like sweet spot. So somebody can do like an hour and a half of sweet spot, then we do an hour 45, and we do two hours. And then the same thing happens with over unders, I think of these individually as well. So like, if you're going to do like FTP with accelerations, like, you know, 15 second acceleration,
You know, let's say it's for cyclocross. You click up two gears and then you stand up and you hammer for 10 seconds and then you sit back down to FTP. Like you do that three by 15. You know, you can progress by adding more time or you can progress by, you know, increasing the density of those accelerations. But I keep that separate in my head from like the steady state work. So I like I compartmentalize every one of these little things in terms of like increasing the time. It's a lot of knobs to turn.
No, it's more than just two. It's like 13 knobs to turn. Yeah, but you can just look back at your previous workouts and go, oh, you know, how long did this happen for? Okay, go back one more, two more. All right, have we been progressing this? Is this person like fatiguing here? Do we have a problem? You know, then we do some assessment and figure out the right way to go forward. But yeah, that's just the way I have learned to compartmentalize it all in my head. All right.
Okay, so a follow-up on the VO2 question. The VO2 training interventions we were introduced to create central structural changes. So should we introduce this training much earlier in the season to make quote-unquote room in our ceiling prior to FTP work? Put another way, instead of starting VO2 Max, we're closer to race prep. Since we are working on the structure of the engine itself, is this training recommended all season long? No, because it's too hard.
How long was that? What was that? Like Coggin was having his wife do like VO2 max every day. Oh, no, he was. He was himself. He was doing it. Yeah, I think he did it for like 18 weeks or something like that. Like almost half a year. Yeah, it was a third of a year or something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's.
You can do it, but the question is, should you do it? I tried this myself a long time ago because I thought there might be something to this. I did a lot of volume and I did a lot of VO2 max. I just had no patience for FTP intervals. I just wanted to noodle and look at the trees or I wanted to destroy myself. And I couldn't do it that long. I mean, I tried. The recovery process in the long term from VO2 max intervals, sometimes
If I see somebody's workouts progressing properly and I can kind of tell that the Vita Max is going up during the workouts, usually I'd say like 30 to 40% of the time we see the immediate improvements. Maybe 25% of the time we see 100% of the improvements like within two or three weeks of finishing the block.
um for most people though it can take like one or two months to even fully recover from that intensity and then like the next block of training or whatever you're doing racing I don't know um and then it can take some time to fully see the benefits and I wouldn't ever want to um
get somebody doing more of that work and digging a deeper long-term fatigue hole before they have fully recovered and we see the benefits of the previous work they had done. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, and that would also maybe be discouraging if you're like, oh man, I should see some great benefits now and you don't because you are so tired. Yeah, I mean, this is the same, you know, the same.
thought of like, oh, I'm going to do one interval session today. Wouldn't two be better? Then wouldn't, you know, if I'm going to do four, yeah, I can do three this week. I should do six this week. I should do 12 this week. If one beer is good, then 10, you know.
So the question is, in the, quote, using molecular biology to maximize concurrent training, unquote, paper, they outline a strategy of cycling in the morning and resistance training in the afternoon. However, I've seen some track cyclists hitting the gym in the morning and track in the afternoon. What do those coaches know that the authors of the paper don't know? Nothing. Yeah. I would say that one caveat to this is if you're doing...
Lifting in the morning and then track sprinting in the afternoon. It's not really the same concurrent training as in the paper because you're doing both our high force, high load, low duration exercises. It's not like they're going out and doing pursuit efforts or something. They're doing 10 to 30 second full gas efforts and then sitting on their ass for 20 minutes.
done those double efforts or those double sessions. The track session later, it sucks. It's crap. You're tired. It's not fun. I mean, maybe I'm just not eating enough. Maybe I should have two burritos for lunch instead. I don't know. But it's hard. And also, the other thing is that actually, it's funny because
there is actually a lot of aerobic flux that happens with those efforts you know it's not like you know because if you could do an effort and then not breathe hard afterwards that'd be fine but you know as somebody I've got a over a 2100 watt sprint and if I do like a 15 second effort like I still need to sit down even though yeah you know you might think like oh it's all anaerobic like it's no it's
Like during the effort, it's a lot of fun. Then after the effort, you're sitting there going, oh, why am I doing this with my life? I would say even in this sort of rather old reference of Up, Up, Up, which you can find on Track Spraying Online, they talk about how...
this is an interview with the old Australian coach from over a decade ago at this point but he talks about how when they do have this times in the season where they're doing gym in the morning and track in the afternoon they don't give a shit about the track times like the focus is the strength training and they're keeping them on the bikes and they're professional athletes so they you know all they have to do is train yeah oh that makes sense yeah so you may not find
You find professionals doing this, but that's because they're professionals, and you may not find so many mere mortals, let's say. Yeah, and also, I would say that, you know, depending on the time of year, I would expect them not to be doing doubles like that constantly, because, you know, that kind of training, like, it is still, you know, it's still hard, and if you do it for longer than... You can dig a deep hole if you... Yeah, do some...
Some big squats and leg press in the morning and then, you know, 20 second acceleration into something afternoon. You could just imagine, like, not wanting to get out of bed the next day. Like, I would get out of bed, but I can't move my legs and therefore I can't put pants on. So I'm just going to stay here and hope someone brings me food. Yeah, I mean... But then if you're a track enduro, then if you're doing this, you're, I would say, more likely in the point of the season where...
you don't care again about exactly what you're hitting out on pursuit efforts or something. Your goal is going to be gym time because presumably you're not going to be doing doubles like mid race season or something like that. Yeah, probably not. But like if you don't want to gain that much mass, then that's a really good way to periodize because then, you know, you're going to stop yourself from getting that much stronger, but you can still get some benefits of lifting. We'll talk about that another time.
Insert that video of some of the hoop guys doing like, you know, 500 pound rack squats and stuff, right? And hurting their knees. Yeah. All right. So next question is...
While I know it is undoubtedly individual, what does a general weekly training structure look like for an athlete focused on building and raising FTP? In other words, how many days a week would you typically prescribe FTP or similar intensity training? And what type of riding and intensity do you prescribe on the non-FTP days and how many rest days, etc.? The big variable here is time. How much time does a person have? So the standard way to do it, the middle of the road.
This will probably be the right amount for most people is three times a week. Whether they're three days in a row or not depends on the schedule and how well they recover. It depends on what time of year it is. It depends on how much volume they're doing. I usually try to give people a day off a week. Some people hate taking days off. That's okay. We're working on that. No, not really.
Yeah, it depends. The other rides, like endurance riding, maybe depending on what else we're doing, we might need to do some anaerobic work or maybe a little bit of lifting, something like that. It really depends on the person and the time of year and all that other stuff. So it's not a clear answer. But yeah, I'd say for how many days FTP training is probably three days a week is probably
Good place to start Yeah I think you know especially I guess this person doesn't say what their their training history is but obviously if you have a more extensive training history then you know maybe you can handle more and if you're brand new to training then my three days maybe you know you maybe want to bump that down to two or something but yeah yeah okay next question is
What strategies do you recommend for long-term development of anaerobic work capacity? Most of the literature I've read suggests that gains occur very quickly, and certainly conventional road cycling quote-unquote wisdom suggests focusing on these duration efforts for a timescale of weeks. In your opinion, is there a benefit to longer periods of targeting AWC, analogous to maximizing aerobic development, or is there a Lydian-esque periodization way to go?
By Lyddiard-esque he, I asked him to clarify, or her, they said, I meant like Arthur Lyddiard, so the coach of many great middle distance runners, who advocated a very periodized approach with just a few weeks before racing with anaerobic work. Actually, this aligns pretty well with what I suggested in your Training Too Hard for Criteriums article and podcast.
Basically, yeah. The anaerobic stuff is like polish. It comes quickly and it goes quickly. And endurance training is actually a form of anaerobic training in a lot of ways. A lot of people I coach, when we do a little rest and I'll give them like a one-minute test, a lot of the time they hit a one-minute personal best after a good period of aerobic improvements.
So, yeah, like, you know, if you're somebody who's not doing a lot of that, like, like, say a track sprinter, probably want to kind of feather the throttle a little bit for most of the year. By that, I mean, like, probably three quarters or something. And, you know, you're going to want to ease back into it after the breaks and stuff like that. Sprinters do take a decent amount of breaks.
But it's, yeah, I mean, that's, yeah, that makes a lot of sense to not do it that much. I mean, doing it all year, I've seen people do that. And honestly, it sucks. Like, it's too tiring. I mean, because why would you, like, it's like, okay, I'm going to walk around my house up and down stairs from the third floor, sorry, second floor to the basement. But I'm going to do it while I have a
A spinning plate on a stick on my hand, right? And all that matters is that I'm in the basement and I've got this plate spinning with a stick. That's the only thing that matters. Why would I start doing that on the second floor and then walk all the way down to get to the basement like that?
I wouldn't want to do that. I mean, that's a lot of effort. It's a lot of energy. And that's kind of what I feel like, you know, the always working on this kind of thing is. And the thing is, like, some people think that, like, like aerobic capacity or FTP work or whatever you want to call it, general aerobic work, if, you know, it's not analogous to it, really.
Because if you do aerobic work really well for like 10 years, you're going to be a really well-trained endurance athlete. But if you do really hard like anaerobic work for 10 years without doing anything else, you're not going to be that good at anything, not even anaerobic stuff. I mean, whatever your workout is, you'll be good at that for sure. But you're not going to like...
I mean specific adaptations to you know something demands the imposed demands or whatever it is the real limiters of like anaerobic capacity are muscle mass and muscle power more than anything else I would say something else too is that for both track sprinting even which is probably you know maybe if you're riding the kilo or Kieran is the great examples of anaerobic work capacity or then
Even to crits and long hilly road races and stuff, like, rarely is anaerobic work capacity going to be the thing that decides the race? Yes and no, yeah. Like, in terms of, like, is your time going to be better spent?
working on FTP to win this hilly road race or anaerobic work capacity. Yeah, it's like, how much do you have left in the tank at the end? Like, that's what matters. And likewise, like, even if you are going to ride the Kirin or the Kilo and you're, you know, you're going to be going...
all out for 40 to 60 seconds. If you can only make 1,000 watts or whatever, it doesn't matter. If you can hold that for 70 seconds, if you can't make the 2,200 to not get dropped after the bike pulls off, it doesn't matter. You're just going to get shot out the back, which...
You're not even able to get into the race at that point. Even if your anaerobic work capacity is great. I would love to meet the person who can only peak at a thousand watts but can hold it for 70 seconds. Anyway, okay, so next question. Has your research shown that SST training, sweet spot training, is really the most effective use of time during early season base building for those of us without unlimited time to train?
How should my base training philosophy change if I'm able to increase weekly volume from 8 to 10 to 12 to 15 hours a week? Okay, so that's two questions, so let's start with the SST. Yes and no. One of the problems having a very limited time to train, like let's say 6 to 8 or maybe 10 hours, is that the big limiter of your fitness is your time to train. It's not...
Much Else, you know, if you're doing like, say two hours on Saturday, two hours on Sunday, that's for six hours, let's call it 10 hours, they've got an hour, four days a week, you know, you're going to have a hard time, you know, developing in the long term. And, you know, sweet spot training and VO2 max training in the right combination will probably be your best bet. However, you still want to look at the long term fatigue.
and recovery of that kind of stuff. Because if you take two weeks off a year and otherwise you're just hammering intervals, I would also say that's also not optimal. Yeah. I would also say, yeah, if you are in one of these limited time scenarios, you also have to be pretty strategic about the races and the events that you do. Like maybe don't sign up for a 200 mile gravel grinder.
Well, no, sign up for it. Just, you know, you may not win unless you're a genetic freak, in which case that's really awesome. Yeah. And more power to you. But we like winning the American way. You got to win. Win, win, win, win. Sorry. I mean, I think that's one of the great things about gravel racing is that you can have that mentality if you want, or you can just have a mentality of like, you know, like doing a marathon. Like, I'm just going to finish. I'm going to have a good time. And I'm going to do it with my friends.
Yeah, so, and if you're able to increase your volume from 8 to 10 to 12 to 15 hours a week, the thing that changes really is, you know, the length of time that you can do intervals. So, like, instead of, you know, if you've got an hour, you know, and your TTE at FTP is, like, 40 minutes, you know, you can do 2x20, and then you can do 2x25, and by then, you know, with the warm-up, you know, now you're stretching an hour 10, and, like, you've got to get off the bike, and you've got to, like...
you know get the kids at school or whatever it is you know that's it's hard to do but if you can stretch it to like 15 hours you know now you can do longer intervals you can do like three by 30 minutes if you've got two hours like you can also do a longer ride so doing a longer endurance ride where if your time is limited and you're really looking for those gains you want to make sure you keep pedaling choose the right terrain for that if you're in Boulder head east or south not west
Are there any differences between men and women that are actually relevant for training? It seems like the research in this area isn't high quality, but most studies on training adaptation are done on men only. In my personal experience, my power curve ends up looking like I'm a regular guy with a bad sprint. So shrug. You know, in terms of like power profile, you know, not really. You know, we had kind of discussed this before.
a little bit. But in terms of actually training, there are a lot of women-specific things to think about, especially with regards to your cycle. And besides that, the intervals, like the sprinting, the FTP stuff, the VA2Max stuff, it's all the same. Yeah. I would say even more so for endurance training, like if you look at...
Other sports, timed sports, marathons, even endurance events on running track, ultras, things like that. The longer the event is, the closer and closer men's and women's times are in terms of world records or what wins world championships or the Olympics or whatever like that. So yeah, certainly for endurance training, it's basically all the same. I think of that video of like...
Van Vluten and Spratt like dropping Cavendish over the Stelvio or whatever from the spring where he's just like, oh, slow down. He's just getting dropped and they're like happily chatting. Yeah, I mean, and Van Vluten doing the, you know, doing the men's training camps because like they're more her speed and because she's, you know, a phenom and amazing. Although I'm personally a bigger fan of Anna Vandenberg and myself, but that's just neither here nor there.
Yeah, no, I don't think there's any, I mean, even if you look at, like, the other end, you look at track sprinting, like, you look at what, like, the times and the weights lifted and things like that for the best women track sprinters are comparable to rank amateur males. Like, your elite amateur, not rank amateur, but your, like, elite amateur males are going to be 10, 15%-ish slower than...
Than world class and world class women are only like 10% ish behind world class men in terms of track spreading times. And then if you look at like weights lifts, like you have like 150 pound women, you know, squatting well over two times their body weight, which like, you know, how many, how many men listening to this can squat over two times their body weight for reps?
Hands? Hands? Hands? You know? So yeah, I think, yeah, you really look at it like, and especially a lot, you see a lot of national teams training together and stuff like that. Not the U.S. really, because we don't have a U.S. national track team, but yeah, the countries that do. Okay. Anyway, actually, you know, one of the coolest people out there doing ultra endurance stuff is Courtney DeWalter.
She won the Moab 240 by more than 10 hours. The second place was a guy who was more than a marathon's distance behind her. Oh, jeez. Yeah. Wow. Yeah, she is really rad. If you ever want to check out any interviews with her, she's really fun. And she eats lots of candy. You get jealous. No, she's not doing keto, everybody.
Yeah. Yeah. So although, you know, having said all that, I do find that when some studies, you know, do look at differences in men and women, you know, the sample groups are small. So you may, so there may be a small sample size effect coming into play there finding differences. And it's something that actually needs a lot more research. You know, I'm working on some things right now and, you know, people doing the testing.
in places where they're allowed to get close to people to do testing. A lot of it is like, can we do women? I'm like, yes, please, more women. And when we have enough women, we'll be able to break out and see if there's any statistical differences between the men and the women. But a lot of the time, one of the problems is just recruiting enough women for these studies. So not that I've done any, but I've been told, and maybe these people are not recruiting hard enough. I don't know. There's probably some of that in there as well.
unfortunately so I wish I had a better answer sorry about that okay so how does the recovery volume of a typical ultra endurance athlete of yours compare to a typical road or crit racer and I asked to clarify the recovery volume he meant how many days a week are spent in either active or passive recovery additional amount per week from longer days in the saddle and stuff like that
Do rest weeks occur with greater frequency? Et cetera, et cetera. You know, it depends on if we're building for something or not. You know, cause if, you know, it's cause it makes like no sense to obviously like do like, you know, really hard, like an FTP build right before an ultra insurance thing. But also, and it makes no sense to do like, you know, V2 max work before that kind of stuff. But
you know for building to that kind of thing yeah it depends on the athlete because some people can do like a 12 hour ride or like a 20 hour ride and be okay after like four or five days and even then like it's like yeah okay let's still take it easy for another week.
But some people, if they hear the music, they want to dance. Who can resist the siren song? Siren song of intervals. I've trained ultra-endurance athletes who just love doing intervals. So sometimes we'll do 10 hours with intervals through that day. And the recovery is like, it depends on the person.
One of the athletes I've been coaching for the longest likes to do mountain bike stage races and he's great at them. And the first time he did a super long race, I think it was like Leadville and then he did Breck. And after each, it took him like two weeks to recover or something like that. But then he went and did Breck again and he was fine after like four or five days. Yeah, it really depends. Like I don't have any strict recipes with like recovery volume or anything like that for anybody.
A lot of it's just, you know, we'll take it easy until you feel good. That's the easiest way to do it. So that's my recommendation. Whereas if I think about Brack Epic, I want to take like two weeks off, you know. To go watch it, yeah. Yeah. Okay, next question is, oh, this person's saying some nice things. Thank you for, I'm glad you're getting faster too.
How does muscle soreness affect training? I'm hoping it's just a mental owie and not physically limiting me to hit my following workouts. Kyle, I believe you have some experience with this. Yeah, I generally think it sucks, like mental owie for sure. I've never found personally that like, well,
Firstly, let's go back. We're still not exactly sure why people get sore. We know that it correlates with like heavy eccentric movements or what do you call it? That would be lengthening your muscle under tension. But we're still not exactly sure why we get sore. But most of the time I've found that while that soreness may mentally...
Put on a little bit of the brakes on when you start. After you start a workout or even if it's just a, it could be more lifting or it could be more riding, you quickly break through that and then you can kind of ignore it for the rest of the time unless you stop moving and then in which case if you stop moving and then are sedentary for a while, you know, an hour or whatever, then it comes back. But really I think the biggest limiter is that if you are still sore, you may still actually be
Actually fatigue, which will make doing the other workouts harder. Yeah. Although, you know, a lot of studies, a lot of studies now have shown that, you know, fatigue does not correlate that well with soreness. Right. So even when people are sore, I usually just say, you know, go warm up and give it a shot. And you might feel good. And most of the time they do. Sometimes not so much. But you don't really know. And the soreness can like mask a lot of the fatigue feelings because, you know, it's making you not want to contract that muscle because it's sore.
But one of the things that happens with weightlifting, if you haven't done it for a while, or long rides, typically super long endurance rides will make people more sore than weightlifting, especially after you've done a couple weightlifting sessions. Soreness can be about comparable, but generally, even after you've done a lot of endurance riding, it can still make you more sore than weightlifting.
That actually brings me to one of my pet theories about soreness is that it has more to do with the structural members like the collagen fibers and interlocking between the muscle fibers and tendons than it has to do with anything actually in the cell. So that's one of my pet theories. I have very little to support it.
Inside the Cell, you don't have nerve endings that go into... I don't know. You wouldn't have... We don't have nociceptors. I'm thinking like...
If the muscle at a certain level if people think oh it's like damage or it's this or it's that like it would have to be at a level that you're where the nerve endings that are in your muscles could still pick that up right like if it's like at a super super small level like like in terms of just scale not saying it's like a small amount of damage but like if the things that are damaged are very very small then like they may be below the threshold of which that your nerve would be able to say like ow that hurts because it has to be able to pick up the the be triggered.
Yeah, I mean, although there are some things that people pick up in terms of muscle damage, like you see a lot of Z-line streaming and things like that, but they don't actually correlate with soreness. You can make those kinds of things happen without soreness, or you can actually make those kinds of things happen and see no...
You can decrease in, if my memory serves me correctly from a couple studies, so if I'm wrong on this, sorry about that, but you can actually induce muscle damage without seeing a decrease in force production or anything like that, like no signs that you might expect to see if there are visibly disrupted sarcomeres. So who knows? They might be in different muscle fibers or they might be this, that, or the other thing.
So there's still a lot there that we have no idea. Including me, especially me. Yeah. But yeah, that's what we know. So sorry, like we said, we've done no prep for this podcast. Yeah, but definitely like if you're sore, like you said, try warming up, try maybe a little bit extra mobility or stretching, something that kind of like maybe it hurts a little bit when you start, but if you move around a little bit, it'll probably feel a lot better.
Can you answer to what extent should we worry about our body fat percentage as an amateur cyclist? I know it can figure into some VO2max equations, but does it make you that much more efficient? For example, take two identical cyclists, one at 15% and the other one at 10% body fat. Other than watts per kilogram, what other benefits would the latter get? And somebody followed up with, why would you consider anything other than watts per kilogram?
so somebody responded arrow in the mocking alternating caps text that is actually a good point if you have a little bit of a gut it is harder to tuck ask me how I know but also just even just riding in a more aggressive position can be harder like bending over if like your knees run into your gut
to pedal that might make it more like less comfortable. Maybe, perhaps. Perhaps we're making some people feel bad about themselves right now, including me. So, I mean, I get sweat. I totally like in.
You know, when I used to do interval workouts, like endurance interval workouts, you could totally see the sweat mark on my jersey where my shorts would touch my stomach. Because there'd be two dots, like right where my thigh would run to my gut. Oh, that's great. Well, okay, so there's, so arrow is a consideration. Yeah, I mean, people talk about like, you know, your shoe cover adds too much arrow.
So there is, you know, because it, you know, it adds surface area and stuff like that. Although it's a lot more complicated than that, obviously. The big thing I would say, you know, because VO2 max stuff, like, you know, it's not like, you know, adipose tissue is not that vascular. I mean, yeah, obviously it has some blood supply, but it's, but like, it's not a big draw on VO2. So, you know, in terms of like, you know,
VO2 Max and stuff like that. Like, you know, a person with the same, you know, all the same characteristics besides like body fat, you know, you would probably see like a small draw of VO2, you know, during a max effort. But the other thing that's really important here is cooling. Because 5% body fat is quite a few pounds depending on how heavy you are.
It can make you keep heat in way too well. And that's one of the benefits of being very, very slim is you can vent that heat a lot better. And one of the big limiters of exercise and intensity is heat production and making sure that you're not going to boil your organs.
From the inside out. And, you know, because blood is, you know, carries heat. Like, that's why we expand capillaries when we get really warm. But this blood also goes everywhere. Like, so it's, you know, our core temperature goes up. If you want to put, you know, your rectal thermometer in and find out, you can do that.
and yeah so like especially over threshold you generate a lot of heat under threshold generate a lot of heat and you know staying cool and venting that is a great way to make sure that you're not you know inhibiting yourself in this way so that's that's one of the really really big concerns with with you know other than watts per kilogram that's one of the big concerns with body fat and honestly
People like to spend hundreds of dollars to save ounces or grams on their bike. It's certainly more cost efficient to save it on your body instead. Yeah, I could have just not eaten the three peanut butter cookies I did before the podcast. Okay, so that's it for the Reddit questions. But as a bonus, I put something up on Instagram.
The lightning round. Asking for questions. So Kyle and I are going to discuss some things and I will cut out anything that we deem not worthy of being included. And if it was not worthy of being included, I'm very sorry. And if you would like me to follow up and you don't hear it.
then please DM me on Instagram at empiricalcycling and I will answer your question. Best techniques to increase power at M slash S max. So this is from a sprint training webinar I did. You know, it's funny because every time I see a phrase like this or like a metric like MS max, I think, what does that mean? And even though I made it, like that's my term.
Because I think about these things conceptually, but never in name. Like I'm not thinking about like this thing. I think about like this concept. Okay, so MS Max is really the fastest at which a person can pedal and still produce power. And beyond that, all you can do is keep up with the pedals. Like you cannot contract fast enough to actually push the pedal on its way around. You know, it's funny because like...
There's a lot of stuff going around about this, especially with the Jim Martin thing that happened recently last year. Actually, maybe two years ago now. Oh, God, we're getting old. Yeah, I think it's like two years ago. Where he was all about relaxation time and increasing basically this. If you can get your muscle to relax faster, then you can create a lot more power because in some model, he set the relaxation time to infinite and suddenly the power goes through the roof.
This is an integral part of training for sprinting, but in the very long term, it's not that trainable. It's really not. You have to have a naturally very fast nervous system. The highest MS max values I've seen are in the high fours. I don't think I've seen one at five yet. It doesn't mean it doesn't exist. I'm sure somebody out there does. My MS max is like 3.8 to four meters a second.
And that's like me training it all the time. It doesn't respond to much. So while it's necessary to do, especially in terms of technique and the neuromuscular timing and making sure that at 180 RPM it feels slow, that's a big deal for a sprinting. But there's not a lot you can do to really, really train it like you can with aerobic capacity. So it's not the silver bullet.
that some people were thinking it would be where, oh, if I just train on 110 millimeter cranks and do all these, you know, other things. Yeah. Okay. Favorite sprint workout for developing snap. Kyle, what is yours? I actually really like doing like the thing where you, well, ideally you would probably do this behind a motorbike, but if you don't have someone to motor pace you where you
Do something like roll down a hill or go down the track banking to get yourself up to speed. Whatever gear you're on, it's just heavy enough that when you stand up, you get that really nice bite. That's a good description. Where if you can get a good 5-10 pedal strokes where you get that snap in each time.
Yeah, I like that. And it tends to be easier if you're going at some speed and not at a stoplight or something like that. Also because of, you know...
velocity, resistance, squared, air resistance, blah, blah, blah. Like you'll probably get more bang for your buck if you're already going a little bit faster than like if you're just going at eight miles an hour and in 3915 and you snap, you probably get some, you know, two, three good pedal strokes off, but you're not going to get that like. Yeah, you sail right through your big power band. Yeah, exactly. Whereas if you're going 20 miles an hour because you're going downhill and you're in 5315, now you're talking like you can get out of the saddle and like give yourself like.
You know, a handful of really good ones. You know, it's funny because, like, that's not mine. Oh, really? Yeah, mine is actually the one that I give to most people to develop snap, like, who don't sprint that much. Like, somebody who's, you know, like a road racer and they don't do a lot of sprinting because they don't feel like they need it. You know, it's like, I want to get better at my breakaways, like most people, which is fine. Yeah, right. Then it's like, you know, they get to...
The point where like, oh, I'm actually getting to the end of races. I need to work on my sprint a little bit. That's when you work on your sprint. And then what I usually happen to do is like do like 10 second to 15 second sprints, sometimes seated. But, you know, if we're working on like this kind of thing, if we're working on snap, I want them to do it standing. So from like a medium gear, like 39, I don't know.
14, probably a little hard, like 16, maybe 17 or something like that. From about 60, 70 RPM, like stand up and hammer for like 15 seconds. The cadence range I usually give people is like you want to go from like 70 to 130 or higher. Oh, wow. Yeah. And when you're at those, because this is a really potent thing for people who don't train this much. So this is where you might see, you know, your MS Max bump up like
You know, point one or point two, like in like a week or two. In long term, it's not going to go up that much, but not that much more. But, you know, in the short term, this is one of those good things because what's happening is you are training your neuromuscular coordination. And this is a big part of the early phase of improving sprint power for just about everybody. You know, it's the same as like squatting or doing any other kind of weightlifting thing.
Yeah, if you get better at the motion itself, you can do it harder if you think about it less. And actually, speaking of that, with weightlifters, they put weightlifters on platforms and they measured the impulse. And really, really good weightlifters have a smaller impulse to move the same amount of weight. So they're actually doing less work. How cool is that? They're just more efficient. It is cool. Okay. I would say the other thing, too, is like...
you kind of get into it like snap can a lot of times be very very mental like if you're out of practice like you're not going to feel good like it'll be you want to do a few sprint sessions to really get back into that feeling like you can snap a gear yeah yeah and actually some people who you know like sprinting but you know like don't you know haven't been racing that much this year actually
and they're like, hey, I miss, I kind of miss sprinting. Like, I don't feel that comfortable when I get out of the saddle. Doing a sprint or two, like for a warmup is a good idea on your interval days, not in your recovery days. God, no. But, you know, but as a warmup doing one or two of these snappy sprints, five, 10 seconds, it really helps with the warmup. And I usually give it to people for, you know, like regular warmups, like a seated PMAX sprint here or there.
It's hard to go wrong unless you're doing like 2,000 watts and it's going to put you in the hole for your workout. Don't do that. Are you coaching anyone over 60? Yes, I am. What's the coldest you'll ride in? It's about freezing, so zero Celsius, like 32 Fahrenheit. You, Kyle? Kyle, you're basically Canadian. You're from Michigan. Yeah, but I feel like I...
Upper body, lower body wise, it's like I feel like I find I'm pretty resistant. I definitely feel the cold the most in my toes and my feet. So that's where I definitely wimp out first. But yeah, I would say like around freezing, maybe if it's like 28, that's okay. But if it's like you wake up, it's like 25 and there's like, you know, a foot of snow that just you're like, no, I can't do it. Yeah. I mean, I don't want to my cutoff is like usually like freezing because about like
American, so I'm going to speak in Fahrenheit. So like 35 degrees or so is like about the coldest I can ride without like putting something over my ears. Yeah, okay. That makes sense. I don't want to have to put hot water into my bottles when I go out. Yeah, for sure. Like I have a friend who's from Minnesota who I raced with at Brown. He said that was his secret to riding outdoors in Minnesota, right? Because you have to train for road season. Yeah. Is he would put hot tea in the insulated like polar bottles.
Yeah, I mean, I've done that with the scratch apple stuff. Oh, yeah. So that's like cider or something. Yeah. Yeah, and it's tasty. High handle or low handle trap bar deadlift? Or does it depend on the phase? It depends on your height. Yeah. So if you're a taller person, you want to do the high handles. If you're a shorter person, you want to do the low handles. If you're a taller person who wants to really...
Really work on, you know, getting really low. You can do the low handles, but it really depends. People over, you know, five, six, five, seven do high handles. I would say the other thing, too, like, you can, this a little bit gets you into, like, squat depth debate, but, like, the extra, like, three or four inches, like, might help your ego. Like, it feels good because, like, yeah, I'm working harder, but, like, mmm. I mean, it,
In a way, it may actually require more neural drive because you can actually move more weight from a more optimal muscle length position. Correct. And it actually puts more tension on your muscles that way. But if the muscles are depending on length, yeah, so it gets into the length tension debate, which isn't really a debate.
Maybe we'll do a podcast on that, but we're not prepared for that right now. But you probably know, if you've ever tried Trap Bar Deadlift, whether the low handles feel significantly harder for a given weight, then maybe you're not a low handle person. I mean, or the other thing is that with the low handles,
you know getting into the right position can be a limiter for some people like with ankle mobility and like hip mobility and stuff because you're kind of forced into a really narrow stance or that gut that we were talking about if you can't that's why you wear a belt belt's not to stabilize your spine it's to suck in the gut I'm just kidding it's totally stabilize your spine long distance triathlete here would you prescribe sprint work why or why not
I would, but only a little bit. And only for the pedaling technique. In order to get used to pedaling fast, I think there is some to be gained from working on your pedaling technique as a long distance athlete. But I don't think it's, you know, it's not totally...
something you really should focus on or worry about if it's like you don't have time or the energy to add that in. I usually give most athletes some high cadence stuff most of the time.
just so that they don't kind of forget what it's like to pedal fast and kind of, you know that feeling of like when you're pedaling really fast, so Kyle and I sprint on the track all the time, so like 170, 80 RPM is like not unusual for us. Like, you know, like we'll do sprints there like frequently for like, you know, 20 seconds at 150, 170 RPM, something like that. But for a lot of athletes, you know, 120, 130, 140, like that's a lot.
And learning to relax and kind of like we said, talked about earlier with the learning of the neuromuscular coordination that I think can have some effect. But it's not like running where, you know, if you pedal a little differently, it's going to make a big difference. All right. Well, that's that's what we got.
Alright, so thank you everybody for listening as always and thank you all for listening to us a hundred thousand times over. I know there were probably some multiple listens from some of you but otherwise I know we don't have actually a hundred thousand listeners but the several thousand of you who are out there listening to us really appreciate it and I want to thank you all for listening to the podcast.
and for reaching out for consultations and, you know, coaching inquiries and stuff like that. That's what keeps this podcast going is, you know, keeping me in business, really. Yeah. And thank you all for the donations over the last year and a half or something like, right? Year and a half? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. It's been over a year now. Yeah. We missed our, we like blew past our one year anniversary. I didn't even think about it. Like I didn't even realize it until like a month later or so.
Thanks everybody as always. If you do want to keep making donations to the show, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We've got no show notes for this episode and we've got merch at empiricalcyclingpodcast.threadless.com. If you have any coaching and consultation inquiries and questions or comments, you can email empiricalcycling at gmail.com and you can find us on Instagram at empiricalcycling. We have a weekend AMA happening right now. So if you had any questions,
from this episode and you want to ask more you can do so there and we may do more AMAs if everybody likes this so if you actually do like this episode give us a shout on Reddit or on Instagram or email or whatever it is let us know if you want us to do more of this kind of episode because this is unusual for us to have no prep work and
Or anything like that. Just feeling free, man. Very free. Alright, so with all that, thank you everybody as always. Bye-bye. Thanks everyone.